NLTK (Natural Language Toolkit) is used for such tasks as tokenization, lemmatization, stemming, parsing, POS tagging, etc. This library has tools for almost all NLP tasks.

Spacy is the main competitor of the NLTK. These two libraries can be used for the same tasks.

Scikit-learn provides a large library for machine learning. The tools for text preprocessing are also presented here.

Gensim is the package for topic and vector space modeling, document similarity.

The general mission of the Pattern library is to serve as the web mining module. So, it supports NLP only as a side task.

Polyglot is the yet another python package for NLP. It is not very popular but also can be used for a wide range of the NLP tasks.

Text to speech: TTS is an assistive technology that reads digital Text aloud. TTS can translate words on a computer or other digital device into audio with a single click of a button or a finger’s touch. TTS is extremely beneficial to both children and adults who have difficulty reading, and it can assist with writing, editing, and focusing.

How does Text-to-speech work?

It usually works by installing a speech recognition program like Speechify on your device or as a browser extension. Without lag, they must examine the words on the page and read them aloud. You can change the default voice to a custom voice, add accents, change languages, and even modify the speaking rate. It has come a long way in synthesized voices. It can recognize structured Text and adjust the tone accordingly. The days of synthetic agents are long gone. Speechify is changing that. You can convert Text to speech from any website within your browser, read your email aloud, and more after using the TTS mobile app. You can accomplish the same thing if you install it as a browser extension. Other significant companies, such as the news and entertainment industries, are starting to include speech as a feature on their websites.

Image captioning in AI is the task of taking/inputting an image to an AI model, and receiving a text caption describing/summarizing the contents of the image as its output.
